Instructor: Prof. Awesome
Email: email@psu.edu

Overview
ENGL 202C, Technical Communication, serves students who are studying and preparing for careers in the sciences and applied sciences, including engineering. This advanced course in writing familiarizes students with the discourse practices prized in their disciplinary and institutional communities and helps them to manage those practices effectively in their own written work. In this way the course teaches those writing strategies and tactics that scientists, engineers, and others will need in order to write successfully on the job.

So how will this work, you ask? This course is paced, which means that there is an established start and end date, and that you will interact with other students throughout the term. The course consists of an electronic book and a required course web site that contains the lessons and communications tools, such as a bulletin board and e-mail system.

About the Summer Version of this Course
This is an intensive, condensed version of the semester-length English 202C course. Because we have only six weeks to address material that would normally be covered over fifteen weeks, this class will require a great deal of your time on a daily basis. Please bear in mind that a regular, on-campus summer class typically meets five days a week for 1 hour and 15 minutes each day and requires nightly homework. While an online course affords more flexibility in terms of when and where you do your coursework, you should expect, nevertheless, to spend the same amount of time or more each day on this class as well.

Because of its accelerated pace, this class works best for active learners. To be successful, you will want to be dedicated and eager to learn.

It is your responsibility to read closely and follow precisely all directions, beginning with those provided in this syllabus. We have a lot to cover and precious little time to do so. You will need to manage your time and workload well, and be accountable for everything you do. Indeed, accountability, productivity, and responsibility are as central to this class as writing.

The course is divided into 14 lessons:

Lesson 1: Defining Technical Communication
Lesson 2: Analyzing Your Audience and Purpose
Lesson 3: Researching Your Subject
Lesson 4: Understanding the Writing Process
Lesson 5: Preparing Job Application Materials
Lesson 6: Communicating Persuasively
Lesson 7: Organizing Your Information
Lesson 8: Drafting and Revising Definitions
Lesson 9: Writing Coherent Documents
Lesson 10: Writing Instructions
Lesson 11: Designing Documents
Lesson 12: Understanding Ethical and Legal Considerations
Lesson 13: Creating Graphics
Lesson 14: Writing Effective Sentences

Within each lesson you will find online "lecture" material, as well as reading assignments and both individual and group activities. The lessons of study are all located within our password-protected course Web site in the Angel course management system.

Like taking a course on campus, it will be important to keep up with the course work, as you will be required to participate in class discussions and activities that have specific time frames associated with them. For a more detailed look at what each lesson will entail, as well as due dates for our assignments and activities, please refer to the Schedule on the course web site.

Course Objectives
Students in the course can expect to:

Discover and understand the discourse features that distinguish their disciplinary and institutional communities from others.
Discover and specify the purpose(s) of their writing.
Develop a range of writing processes appropriate to various writing tasks.
Identify their readers and describe the characteristics of their readers in a way that forms a sound basis for deciding how to write to them.
Invent the contents of their communications through research and reflection.
Arrange material to raise and satisfy readers' expectations, using both conventional and rhetorical patterns of organization.
Reveal the organization of their communications by using forecasting and transitional statements, headings, and effective page/document design.
Observe appropriate generic conventions and formats for technical documents.
Design and use tables, graphs, and technical illustrations.
Compose effective sentences.
Evaluate their documents to be sure that the documents fulfill their purpose and to ensure that they can be revised if necessary.
Collaborate effectively with their peers in a community of writers who provide feedback on each others' work and occasionally write together.
Write several specific kinds of documents that recur in technical, scientific, and other communities.
Employ computer technology effectively in the solution of communication problems.
Communicate in an ethically responsible manner.
Required Course Materials
The following materials are required and must be purchased online:

Technical Communication by Mike Markel. Bedford/St. Martin's, 2012. Tenth edition. E-book, standard version. You can purchase access to this e-book directly at < http://bcs.bedfordstmartins.com/techcomm10e/ >, or you can buy an access code at the Penn State bookstore.
Note: For this class, we will be using the e-book version of Technical Communication. You'll be able to read the full book online once you purchase access to it. The e-book version is considerably cheaper than the print version, and it is accessible wherever you can access the web.

Library Resources
Many of Penn State's library resources can be utilized from a distance. Through the Library Resources and Services for Off-Campus Users Web site, you can...

access magazine, journal, and newspaper articles online using library databases
borrow materials and have them delivered to your doorstep...or even your desktop
ask a librarian for research help via e-mail, chat, or phone using the ASK! service
...and much more!

NOTE: You must have an active Penn State Access Account to take full advantage of the Libraries' resources and services. Once you have a Penn State account, you will automatically be registered with the library within 24-48 hours. If you would like to check that your library registration has been completed, visit the Library's homepage, click on "My Library Accounts" and then click on "CAT Account"

Software
One of the benefits of being a registered Penn State student is that you are eligible to receive educational discounts on many software titles. If you are interested in learning more about purchasing software through our affiliate vendor, please visit our Student Services page regarding course materials.

Tech Support
If you need technical assistance at any point during the course, please contact Angel Support.

Course Requirements and Grading

Class Participation

20%

Self-study quizzes, peer review, homework assignments

Assignment 1

5%

Basic Rhetorical Analysis

Assignment 2

15%

Internet Resource Guide

Assignment 3

15%

Job Application Package

Assignment 4

10%

Technical Definition

Assignment 5

15%

Instruction Set

Assignment 6

20%

Redesign Project

Class Participation
Your class participation grade encompasses two important parts of the course: reading and collaboration. All reading assignments will be followed by a self-study quiz that will help you review important concepts from the chapter. Additionally, peer-review worksheets and assignment planning worksheets will contain references to the reading that ask you to evaluate writing in terms of the textbook. You must be familiar with the textbook material to complete these assignments satisfactorily.

In addition to reading the textbook, you will frequently collaborate with your classmates by reading and responding to their drafts. Each major writing project will require peer feedback organized around review questions pertinent to the assignment. Students failing to take the task of peer review seriously will be penalized.

Writing
This course will hold you to the professional standards that prevail in your field. Each of your formal writing assignments is expected to look professional and polished. At work, even a single error in spelling, grammar, or proofreading can jeopardize the effectiveness of some communications (depending on the rhetorical situation). Whether it is a resume, memo, or report, your communication should exhibit complete and appropriate format. Grading will reflect the great seriousness with which these matters are frequently viewed in the working world. If you would like special assistance with any of these skills, I can recommend sources for extra help. Your textbook, however, is the best and primary source.

There are six major assignments: Basic Rhetorical Analysis, Internet Resource Guide, Job Application Package, Technical Definition, Instruction Set, and Redesign Project.

Basic Rhetorical Analysis
Technical communication is meant to be used and not just read. Good technical communication communicates information to an audience who will act on that information in a variety of ways: in making hiring decisions, in following technical procedures, in developing research plans, and more. In this assignment, you will evaluate the usability of a piece of technical communication—that is, you will analyze whether the document effectively communicates the necessary information to its audience and where it fails to do so. In this way, the assignment will introduce you to basic elements of technical communication.
Final Length: 1000-word memo

Internet Resource Guide
Through this assignment, you will become familiar with online communication resources specific to your field of study, including research tools, professional societies, and other Internet sites that members of your field should find useful. You will present and describe those resources to other members of your field in a technical guide. You will need to make decisions about organization, format, and style as a means of creating a usable document for readers. And you will need to learn to write effective abstracts.
Final Length: Eight abstracts (one or two paragraphs each) plus front matter

Job Application Package
The process of applying for a job is an extremely important scenario for technical communication. As a job applicant, you have a vested interest in communicating your suitability for the position with the specific audience making employment decisions. This assignment will ask you to create resumes and application documents attuned to the rhetorical situations of two actual job offerings in your field. You will also discuss your writing and communication decisions in a reflective memo.
Final Length: Two resumes, two cover letters, and a 1000-word cover memo

Technical Definition
Engineers and scientists are often required to describe a technical object, concept, or process to someone who has little knowledge or experience with the subject at hand. For example, an engineering firm might write a proposal to bid on a contract to develop a helicopter for the Defense Department; one section of the proposal would be a detailed description of the product the company proposes to develop. Technical descriptions are used before products and processes are developed (as part of proposals and planning documents), during development (in progress reports, for instance), and afterwards (as part of marketing and promotional literature and technical support documents). You will write a technical definition for an object, concept, or process in your field.
Final Length: Approximately 1000 words

Instruction Set
Instruction sets are common technical documents for many disciplines and occupations. Employees read instructions to learn how to assemble a product or complete a procedure. Supervisors write out company policies that oftentimes serve as instruction sets. Customers read instructions for using a product. You will develop a set of instructions advising users to perform a specific task.
Final Length: Approximately 1000 words

Redesign Project
Design is an increasingly important facet of technical communication. With even basic computer programs like Microsoft Word, writers can adjust the visual aspects of their documents to enhance communication and clarity. They can also design text in sophisticated ways. This assignment will require you to redesign a given piece of text for a specific rhetorical situation and to reflect on the decisions you made in the design process.
Final Length: Redesigned document plus 1000-word reflective memo

The grades of A, B, C, D, and F indicate the following qualities of academic performance:

A = (Excellent) Indicates exceptional achievement
B = (Good) Indicates extensive achievement
C = (Satisfactory) Indicates acceptable achievement
D = (Poor) Indicates only minimal achievement
F = (Failure) Indicates inadequate achievement necessitating a repetition of the course in order to secure credit

Academic Integrity
The Department of English is committed to maintaining academic integrity in this and all other courses it offers. We take matters of academic integrity very seriously. Academic integrity--scholarship free of fraud and deception--is an important educational objective of Penn State. Academic dishonesty can lead to a failing grade or referral to the Office of Judicial Affairs.

Academic dishonesty includes, but is not limited to:

cheating
plagiarism
fabrication of information or citations
facilitating acts of academic dishonesty by others
unauthorized prior possession of examinations
submitting the work of another person or work previously used without informing the instructor and securing written approval
tampering with the academic work of other students
In cases where academic integrity is questioned, Penn State's policy on academic integrity requires that the instructor give the student notice of the charge as well as the recommended sanction. Procedures allow the student to accept or contest the charge through discussions with the instructor. If a student accepts the charge and the recommended sanction, the respective College files the case with the Office of Judicial Affairs. If a student chooses to contest, the case will then be managed by the respective College or Campus Academic Integrity Committee. If a disciplinary sanction also is recommended, the case will be referred to the Office of Judicial Affairs.

All Penn State colleges abide by this Penn State policy, but review procedures vary by college when academic dishonesty is suspected.

Additionally, students enrolled at Penn State are expected to act with civility and personal integrity; respect other students' dignity, rights, and property; and help create and maintain an environment in which all can succeed through the fruits of their own efforts. An environment of academic integrity is requisite to respect for self and others, and a civil community.

For more information on academic integrity at Penn State, please see the Academic Integrity Chart for specific college contact information or visit one of the following URLs:
www.psu.edu/dept/oue/aappm/G-9.html
http://www.sa.psu.edu/ja/

Accommodating Disabilities
Penn State welcomes students with disabilities into the University's educational programs. If you have a disability-related need for reasonable academic adjustments in this course, contact the Office for Disability Services (ODS) at 814-863-1807 (V/TTY). For further information regarding ODS, please visit the Office for Disability Services Web site.

In order to receive consideration for course accommodations, you must contact ODS and provide documentation (see the documentation guidelines). ODS will provide a letter identifying appropriate academic adjustments. Please share this letter and discuss the adjustments with your instructor as early in the course as possible. You must contact ODS and request academic adjustment letters at the beginning of each semester.

Late Policy
Descriptions of each assignment, as well as evaluation criteria, will be provided throughout the course. The dates listed for assignments may change as the semester progresses (don't worry--you'll be notified of any changes through ANGEL announcements or coursemail!). Nonetheless, we expect assignments to be completed on time, as evidenced by the date stamp given to them by the ANGEL dropboxes. Major assignments will be docked one full letter grade for each day after the due date that they are late; everyday course activities (e.g., reading responses, smaller writing activities, peer-review exchanges) cannot be made up if missed.

We use this system even in the event of excusable situations, such as minor sicknesses or other unforeseen conflicts. However, any exceptions to this policy are made at our discretion. If you have conflicts, or something unexpected arises, do not hesitate to contact your instructor, and we'll arrive at a solution together. You must hand in all major assignments to pass the course. Incompletes (I's) will not be given except under extenuating circumstances that are discussed with your instructor prior to assignment of final grades.

Disclaimer: Please note that the specifics of this Syllabus are subject to change, and you will be responsible for abiding by any such changes. Your instructor will notify you of any changes.

Pennsylvania State University © 2014
